In my mind, there's nothing
quite like that moment in the
theater where the curtains rise,
and there before you is
another world.
And that's you department,
the design department.
Like any department in the
theater, you have to begin
with planning.
What's your first step?
Well, it's to read the script.
And most scripts have
a set description.
For example, Peter
Pan-- which we're
working on at the moment--
will give you a description
of the house
Mr. and Mrs. Darling.
The exterior.
I do some thumbnail sketches
like this, reading scripts and
taking notes and having
chats with the
director and what he wants.
And research as well?
Researching books, libraries,
museums, films, photographs,
anything we can get a hold of
which is relative to the style
and period.
From this we go into a
more detailed sketch.
Goodness, I should say.
This was the first idea I had
for the outside of Mr. and
Mrs. Darling's house
in Bloomsbury.
And you can see Peter
Pan up there.
Now, having presented this to
the director, although he
liked it, it wasn't suitable
for the style he
was going to it.
And it was more of a straight
Victorian play than a pantomime.
So from this sketch we've gone
into that, which is the
original style of building.
This finished result is
basically a back cloth with a
practical door.
And you've got other
sketches, yeah?
I want to see these.
Well, these are the
mermaid's lagoon,
which is another scene.
Again, this is the first
ideas we had.
And another one here.
But great depth it produces.
Well, that's part of stage
design as art is to create
depth and space in a black
box, basically.
Now from these, we
go into a model.
Now the model is based
on the ground plan.
This is the ground plan
of the stage.
It's done to scale.
And this is the first
stage of a model.
It's a white card model.
It's just made out of mounting
board and PVA glue.
Now because this has to be taken
away-- i.e. struck--
during the show, in front
of the audience,
this has been trucks.
That on wheels, isn 't it?
On wheels.
So the scene change will
actually be in view of the
audience and it will do this.
It will come off to the
back of the theater.
These two pieces will then come
off into the wings, and
these two pieces--
i.e. the kennel and
bit of wall--
will just disappear
into the wings.
We then have a front cloth which
comes flying in, which
you can see downstairs.
Everything is planned, so we
can know exactly how each
piece of scenery was going
to fit into the
wings and on stage.
Because in this show it is
incredibly heavy scenery, so
there's only a certain
amount of wing space.
So each section has to fit, not
only on stage, but also
off stage as well.
And so, presumably, the next
stage would be painting it.
Well, from this we actually
go into a full color
model, which are these.
So it is from this stage that
then we go into painting.
And we use the model to
base the painting on.
And texturize it
as well, I see.
That's right.
Wonderful.
And painting we're
coming onto next.
And will I be allowed a--
Of course.
--go at painting?
Oh, I will?
Oh, good.
Looking forward to that.
How do you begin
with painting?
Surely you don't just
take a brush and
begin with your backcloth?
What's the order of events?
Well, after we've done a black
and white pencil sketch, we
start on these color visuals--
which again, are to scale--
and we use these artist's
gouache because they represent
a very good color match to the
scenery paint that we use.
Now the backcloth is squared up
in half inch squares, and
when we paint it onto the actual
real backcloth, we
scale it up to one
foot squares.
So we just enlarge it
square by square.
These are other examples
of different shows.
This is a pantomime.
And this one is a little
more complicated view
of a dockland scene.
Now again, these are all half
inch squares, but because it's
a little more detailed we grid
this into two foot squares.
So it just gives us an
extra bit of help.
Further detail.
That's right.
And now let's return to this
lagoon, which I saw last as a
sketch, and it has become
more colorful.
That's right.
From that sketch, we've now
got a scale model of the
various cut cloths, ground rows,
rocks and paraphernalia.
What is missing on this model is
two large clam shells with
pearls that light up and
mermaids that drape around it.
We've got something downstairs,
I know, and this
is its mini version.
It's the nursery, isn't it?
That's right.
Exactly the same process
as the other
sketches I've showed you.
We're in the middle of painting
this, and this is
where we started from.
And here is the actual
life-sized set, and I must say
it looks grand.
Ian, this is our front
cloth, as well.
It's a front cloth isn't it?
Now can you explain how this
works in relation to the set?
Well, how it originates
is this--
This is the design.
Again, it's enlarged by squaring
up half inch squares
on the design, and then
producing one foot squares on
the actual gauze.
And so each square is then
reproduced and enlarged on to
the actual painting.
But light is going to
shine through this.
There's a set beyond this.
Right.
So we'll see this nursery
through this gauze.
Now what kind of paint
do you use?
Well, we don't use emulsion
paint or any oil-based paint.
The paints are down here.
They're originally pure powder
pigment, which is a very
strong medium, mixed with would
glue watered down 50%
with water, and a bit of
methylated spirits.
The methylated spirits helps
to break down the paint.
What does the glue do?
Well, the glue stops the powder
paint from coming off
on your hands, and from
literally just flaking away.
Well, that's handy.
So the glue is the binder, the
methylated spirits is a
vehicle to get everything
going and
bringing out the color.
And this is a bit of that I've
mixed up, which we're going to
paint a chest of drawers with.
Oh, right.
Am I going to do that?
Yes.
Oh, good.
Over here are the beginnings
of the chest of drawers.
So I'll just line this up
using a straight edge.
In this case, it's a piece
of tray with a
cupboard handle on it.
And you just run the
brush along.
Like a giant ruler.
That's right.
That's clever.
Like this.
Now if you'd like to go and a
bit of wood graining, just
brushing along.
Right.
Just one straight--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
That's right.
Is there enough paint in that?
Yeah.
Really?
That's good.
And just keep going.
And you're going to talk to us
about different painting
techniques, aren't you--
That's right.
--in programs to come?
But meanwhile, I've got
a nursery to finish.
Do you mind?
I'll have to carry on.
You're doing a fine job.
Thank you.
There are all kinds of painting
techniques in theater design.
We've already looked at the
traditional one, with paint
and brush, but today Ian is
going to show us some far more
exciting ways with paint,
aren't you?
That's right.
What have we got here?
We've got a woodland gauze for
Babes in the Wood, and I'm
going to show you a quick way of
making leaves with a spray
gun, stencil made out of
cardboard, and just spraying
in leaf shapes.
Well, that's very
straightforward.
And instant, isn't it?
That's right.
If you haven't got access to
spray equipment, then a sea
sponge will do very much
the same thing.
But again, it's just pushing the
paint through the stencil.
And that's a natural
sponge, is it?
That's right.
Something you get from the
chemist. You can also use this
in it's own right to create
a leaf motif or
some breakup, anyway.
Leaf motif.
Great.
And what else?
What is this for?
Do you use that as well?
This is a good one.
Again, this is jute scrim,
which we use
to reinforce plaster.
Is it the same as
a piece of sack?
Very similar.
You can use sacking.
This is nice to just break up
pattern of moss or anything
that's going on in a woodland.
Lovely.
And is that the point treating
a gauze like this, that it's
building up lots of different
shapes and
textures and patterns?
That's right.
Not to create a specific hard
line design, but just to give
and effect?
Well, with this woodland scene
we need something quite soft
and ethereal.
And if we've got an area like
this, that needs breaking up,
a good way is splattering it.
Ah, right.
I'm standing back.
And you can just splatter by
pushing and spraying paint on
to the gauze.
Oh, great fun.
Like that.
Can I have a go?
Yeah.
There's enough paint on there.
And so you wouldn't--
sorry to be crude about it-- but
you wouldn't actually have
to be anything of an artist to
have a go at this, would you?
No, not really.
Not in the formal sense
of the word.
Even I can do this.
That's right.
And if you shake the brush in a
vertical manner, like that,
you can get more direction
into it.
Put some more paint on it.
Yeah, that's it.
What would that effect--
Well, if you do it lower down
you can get grass effects and
break ups like that.
Oh, I see.
You see.
Right.
That's fine.
Oh, brilliant.
There's a great deal in
a set like this, Ian.
It's beautiful.
Thank you.
And a lot of detail.
Let's start with this wonderful
fireplace, which
looks very realistic.
Tiling and everything.
Tell us about that.
Well, the tiles are just painted
hardboard, and then
they're varnished over.
But these chaps, they're
supposed to be wooden toy
soldiers, and they were
originated in clay, then a
Plaster of Paris model taken,
and then fiberglass and
gelcoat was made into these.
And these--
[KNOCKING]
Strong, as well.
That's right.
Lovely.
Moving right along, fully
practical doors, of course.
That's right. full
catches rather
than normal door catches.
Right.
And this-- there's something
rather unusual about this
porthole window, isn't There?
Well this molding is actually
made of rubber.
It's an extruded rubber,
and it's bendy.
The reason we do this, is it's
cheaper and quicker to buy
this by the yard from the
suppliers and glue this flex
mold around, and wood grain it,
than it is to build this
up in wood and then put
a router around it.
It also takes a lot of knocks
and bruises, whereas wood
would tend to chip.
Right.
Well, very practical.
Now French windows--
at the moment, you can go
right through them.
Is there going to be any glass
or plastic in them?
We don't use glass, but
we use clear Perspex.
And we'll get a bar of soap and
just streak it across the
front of the Perspex,
just to cut down the
flare of the lights.
It'll look fine on stage.
So it won't look streak--
No.
--or smeared?
It'll look like glass.
That's right.
How clever.
All right.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
There's something rather special
about this chest,
isn't there?
Well, Tinkerbell flies into the
nursery and she's hunting
for Peter's shadow, and
the chest of drawers
has to open by itself.
And what we've got is a little
stop so this drawer doesn't
push out, bit behind it, we have
a hole where the stage
crew will put their hand and a
handle, which they'll operate.
And it's bolted onto the set.
So it will all appear
as if by magic.
That's right.
Brilliant.
These look like ordinary
paintings, at first glance,
but actually they're
gauze aren't they?
That's right, it's the same
technique we used for the
front cloth, but here--
because the people controlling
Peter Pan's flying wires--
they need to have a look on
set, and since this is a
completely enclosed set, we've
got these vision holes.
And we'll show you
around the back.
All right.
Let's have a look round here.
These are them?
This is the back of the set.
And what we've got is a bit of
a black tat covering this
gauze panel.
And we can see on to the set.
And bear in mind the back
stage is going to be
completely pitch black, so the
audience won't see the
technicians working the flying
lines, but the technicians can
see Peter Pan and the cast
working the stage.
And it's a safe way of working,
and we can control
the up and down movements.
And they won't be seen buy
the audience at all?
No, that's right.
And there's another one here,
because we'll need a bit of
vision down stage.
And when they're not in use, we
just cover them up with a
bit of black.
Excellent.
And why is it all black?
Well in this scene--
this on trucks, which are
plywood bases on casters, and
these trucks are spun round
during the scene change.
And the audience will actually
see this scene
change, and it splits.
Going back to the plan we had
earlier, the white card model
I showed you how the
set change was
actually going to operate--
and because it's going to be
seen, wwe've painted the
reverse of the set all black
just to hide it.
Yes, I see.
Right.
Now, this is pretty
solid stuff.
It's not like our flats.
Now how is this constructed?
It's good, solid, joinery
quality timber, mortise and
tenon joints, with-- this is
what we call a shoe and a
toggle rail.
And it's plywood covered
in canvas.
Right.
And you've got a lot
of hinges, I see.
It's all jointed.
It's all put together with spit
pin hinges here and here.
And these pins--
which are strong wire
which come out--
which means that the two pieces
of scenery can split.
Right.
So a very solid, practical
piece of building.
Very creative, too.
Thank you.
Ian, when I go to the theater,
I expect to see a great deal
of movement, of flexibility,
of scene changes.
That's all very stimulating.
And although you showed us on
the white card model how easy
it was to move large pieces of
furniture on a piece of paper,
how do you actually transfer
that kind of technology to a
large pieces of set like this?
Well, we choreograph the set
change using the white card
model and ground plan.
And every piece of scenery has
its own truck, which has
caster underneath.
And we can actually decide on
how to get rid of the nursery
set into the wings by actually
moving the model and
playing with it.
So it's a piece of choreography,
really.
So this piece-- this kennel--
will split from the fireplace,
and it will do something like
this-- very easily, because
it is on wheels--
and will rotate.
And if you get over on
the other end, we'll
do exactly the same.
And this will be done in
view of the audience.
And this will--
It's amazingly easy to
move, actually, isn't
it, with two people?
That's right.
And this kennel then--
So I'll put it round
the other end.
--will go behind.
That's good.
The reason why we're doing this
is because we want the
audience to see the nursery
split up stage.
Now, we've painted this black
just in case parts of the set
behind will be seen
by the audience.
It's just clipped.
Each piece is clipped with
a simple cabin hook--
gate hook--
like that.
And it will hold it tight?
That's it.
That's all we need.
Hold it still for
the duration.
And this is just hardwood?
Plywood?
It's timber frame and plywood,
and then on the front it's
covered with canvas.
And the reason we cover the
flats with canvas is it's
better to paint with.
When you paint raw plywood, you
always get the grain, as
you can see here.
Right.
And explain about the
trucks again?
These are the casters, but
how is the frame made?
Well, it's a timber frame with
a plywood base, and the
casters are bolted to
the underneath.
Just ordinary furniture
casters?
No, we don't use ball casters
in sofas and armchairs,
they're heavy duty industrial
casters which have a rubber
tire, and it stops the noise.
Oh, yes.
Good point.
And presumably, you have to
keep them well oiled.
Oh, yes.
Well greased and oiled.
Because actually this--
I mean, it's very sturdy, it's
large, and it's probably quite
heavy, isn't it?
It is quite heavy but, the
reason we put everything on
casters, it will move quite
silently into the wings.
Yes.
It's actually quite mobile.
And this is Nana's kennel.
Can we turn that around,
actually?
Now, would you have a
real dog for this?
No, we'll have an actor in a
dog costume, and we'll just
put a piece of carpet
underneath.
It saves the costume being torn
by the timber, and makes
the actor's knees wear
a little better.
Very comfortable.
I think I could get
used to this.
I'd be all right.
So, creative, practical,
anyone could do it.
And we can move you.
Yes.
Allison are we there yet?
Not yet, Christina.
Pieces of scenery can be a great
deal of fun, but they
can also be hazardous.
As you can see if you come
around the side of this little
wonder, what looks so
3-dimensional from the front
is actually very thin and can
be quite wobbly as well.
It's held up at the back just
with two French braces and a
couple of stage weights.
And how heavy would
these weights be?
Very heavy.
Perhaps one person would
only want to carry one.
Around the back of these, for
safety's sake you tend to put
this-- which is hazard tape.
Obviously, when the show's
on, back here is
going to be very dark.
Right.
Stop people stubbing
their toes?
Yes, and from knocking
it overs.
If you knock one of these French
braces out of the way,
it's possible that the
whole piece of
scenery will fall over.
So you want to be very
careful of that.
Hazard tape is quite expensive,
but really, it's a
false economy not to buy it.
OK?
Right.
Good.
Now come over here.
We've got the larger
flats here.
I'll show you how this
French brace works.
There's a very particular
way of putting it on.
If you see it on the eye, up
here, this prong, which looks
like a bull's horn, needs to
be pulled right around.
It's not done quite
right on this one.
So if you just hold this piece
of scenery just here, I'll
take the weight off.
Let's have a look.
Now, don't let go, will you?
All right, you want to put the
bull's horn through there, and
then twist it.
And you see, when it's twisted
to it's full extent, the wood
is nearly up against this.
And that's the safest
point to hold that.
Now, don't let go yet.
And then you put the
weight back on the
bottom, there you are.
And that secure again.
Right.
OK?
So you can let go now.
And if this flat had a door in
it, that would be quite secure
for shutting up against
it and slamming it?
Oh, it's quite solid,
isn't it?
It is quite solid.
One of the ways to tell if
you've braced something
sufficiently, if you kick
the bottom of it--
if the whole flat wobbles you
need some more weight on the
back or it's going
to fall over.
And if it's fairly sturdy
like that, then
you've done a good job.
Obviously, when you're using
French brace like this with a
doorway, you don't want to
brace across the doorway,
because the person that's coming
out is going to fall
straight over it.
And everyone in the audience
is going to see it as well.
Right.
Let's come to this
side of the set.
And when it comes to things
like pictures--
you need to be quite careful
fixing pictures to the wall.
Obviously, you don't want
things to fall off.
So if you were to fix something
like you would
normally, say , and put
a hook into a wall and
fasten it like that.
That is not ideal for the
theater, because if anybody
did kick the back it's possible
the whole thing could
wobble off.
So ideally, what you do is
drill a couple of holes
through where you wanted it,
and put some wire through
that, and wire it to the
back of the picture.
Perhaps, here and here.
So that the picture was held
securely with the wire.
And the wire went
right through to
the back of the flat?
Right through to the
back of flat.
And you twist it up
around the back.
So if somebody kicked it, then
you wouldn't have the ultimate
disaster of the picture
falling off the wall.
Unless you wanted it to.
Rugs.
Obviously, at home when you
have a rug on a polished
floor, you to find some way of
securing it, otherwise you'll
break your neck.
It can be quite a problem.
On stage it's just the same.
How would you go about
securing this?
Well, the easiest way, really,
is to use our old friend,
gaffer tape.
And any type of tape that's
particularly strong you can
use like this.
If you turn it into--
so it's like double-sided
tape, like this.
Pop it under a corner.
You'd want to do all
four corners.
And that's all?
Just the four corners?
It will be quite secure.
Yes.
Quite secure.
Go on then, have a go.
How about, then?
You're a mine of information,
aren't you?
Many professional actors who
work with touring companies--
they feel that life on the road
can be very demanding.
But there are a number of
amateur companies who not only
have to transport themselves all
over the region to put on
a show, but their lights,
sound equipment,
and scenery as well.
Paul and Graham, you've been
with the Hamlet Players for
five years now, haven't you?
How did it all begin?
Well, it started off with the
fact that it's very difficult
to get an audience in one
particular village.
So we thought, well, if
they don't come to
us, we'll go to them.
So we erected this scenery here,
which is quite adaptable
and it can be put
up very quickly.
So we have to get everything
that will fit on the small
trailer behind Paul's car.
Amazing.
Now, I'm concerned that you
didn't find enough people in
one village.
Do you actually have a home
in that village, and--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
We've got a little village hall
where we do some of our
rehearsing.
But, it's very difficult
to get an audience.
We can get perhaps 20, and
by moving around as
we do with a play--
three nights, three separate
audiences.
It's great.
And you're known primarily
to be a touring company?
Yes, it's taken quite a bit of
time, but we're now actually
getting to be known, and people
actually will come.
We'll get quite a
good audience,
probably 60, 70, or so.
Yeah, great.
Well, this is all very neatly
packed now, but I would like
to unwrap it and see
you put it up.
See how it all goes together.
OK, will do.
Well, Paul, this is amazing.
How long does it actually
taken you to erect?
Well, it took about 3/4 of an
hour, and it doesn't take very
long because we use these
wing nuts and bolts.
And it's quickly bolted
together, and then supported
all the way around.
So it doesn't take
that long at all.
That's amazing.
There's still a bit of
touching up going on.
Yeah.
what we do-- because it's bolted
together you get a gap,
so what we do, we run some
masking tape down there, and
then we paint that in, and
then it dries up once the
lights have been on.
And that works quite well.
And pictures and things--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
--we're only half way
at the moment.
Obviously pictures, switches,
carpet, obviously all the
furniture and things.
And these flats are actually
made of hardboard.
Yes, hardboard.
So it works because it's
cheap, basically.
Cheap, durable, it's
quite hard.
I mean, we can actually
get pictures on.
We can use screws and nails to
hold the pictures on, and it
works quite well.
And because that panel--
obviously, that's a door.
That can be moved around
into whatever
position we want it in.
Right.
This makes them quite
light, as well.
That's right, it makes
it light, yeah.
Now, they're only
eight foot high,
aren't they, these flats?
Yes.
That's right.
The reason for that being?
Well, because most village halls
and things we go to, the
actual ceiling height is quite
low, so to get an average--
we normally make them eight by
four, and that seems to work
quite well.
And also, it fits onto the
trailer quite well, and it's
easy to handle.
And what about width?
I mean, you must go to some
place, halls, that are quite
different in shape?
That's right.
If we get to a smaller stage,
we just remove a panel, and
then bolt it all together, and
just make it to any size we
want, basically.
Amazing.
It's not a problem.
So it's portability,
and adaptability?
Yes, that's it.
Ian, you've got a veritable
Santa's workshop here.
This is where you make
your small props.
That's right.
Right.
Now, obviously, this
as a candle.
Why are you making it?
Well, I get asked an awful lot
for candles, and we can't use
real flame on stage because of
the fire regulations, we we
have to make them.
Now, this little thing is run
off a 9-volt battery, and its
hidden inside this matchbox.
Now it's made--
this is the actual flame.
It's a printed circuit, which
you can you get from the
electrical wholesaler's.
And a piece of plastic tubing
with hot glue poured over
this, and that's inserted
inside.
And then to make the flame, it's
plumber's clear silicon,
dotted on there and pulled
out to the flame shape.
And then we paint it up,
put inside of the tray.
Right.
Wonderful.
That's great.
What else can you show us?
These books.
Now, these are wonderful.
Very light.
Why not use real ones?
Is that the reason?
Well because if we have a whole
shelf of books, it's
going to be very heavy.
So we make these out of
polystyrene, cardboard, and
then muslin and PVA scrimmed
over the top and painted.
We can do a whole library
of books like this.
Now these.
These are real, obviously.
And now why would something like
this be used, as opposed
to something--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Well, if we've got a fight
scene, we need
proper fight swords.
This gives a very good sound.
Now these will be choreographed
as a fight
scene, so we use real swords.
Right.
And you're very careful
with those.
Now this bomb--
Lovely.
Boom.
This is made out of a toilet
ball cock and a piece of
doweling inside.
What is this, then?
That's right.
And then we'd have
a firework--
a little sparkler--
coming in.
It works a treat.
Oh, excellent.
So you'd throw about
between you.
And this--
this is wonderful.
How long did this
take to make?
Well, it's about a
morning's work.
It's a pantomime cake, and it's
made out of polystyrene
and, again, muslin with PVA
scrimmed over the top, and
lots of glitter, and we use
ready-made Christmas
decorations for the candles.
And the same flicker effect?
Well, that's right.
The same thins as that.
So it can light up.
That's marvelous.
Now, it was this.
Yes, a mallet.
It is presumably a pantomime
mallet, is it?
It's soft.
Yes, that' right.
Well, what it is made out
of is a wooden dowel--
a wooden stem--
foam, and latex, with
muslin over it.
And that gives us a nice
soft [INAUDIBLE] to it.
I'd better check it
out, actually.
Oh, well that worked.
Hello.
Oh, have we arrived?
My goodness, it's
a bit difficult
crawling out of there.
How would Cinderella manage
that in a crinoline and a
powdered wig?
She'd actually use the door,
which is on the other side.
Ian, this is a fantastic
construction.
How would you begin making
a Cinderella coach?
Well this is made of steel,
predominately.
And there's a steel base
and a steel frame.
This is plywood profiling,
and then it's covered
in Artex and glitter.
And then we have
fairy lights--
put power from a 12-volt
batter from the back.
Brilliant.
And it's fully practical,
isn't it?
That's right.
It is quite heavy, and it will
be pulled by three actual
horses-- white ponies.
Oh, sweet.
Lovely.
The interesting thing here is,
because we wanted the wheels
to light up, we've got a little
mechanical gizmo there.
It's a series of electrical
brushes with contacts, which
make the lights light up.
Right.
Is this a rubber trim?
That's right.
They're actually real steel
tires and rubber tires.
You've got to look after your
stage, as well, haven't you?
That's right.
Now going on to something that
looks equally heavy, this
cannon is actually very light
and maneuverable.
That's right.
It's very lightweight, and it's
on casters, which makes
it easier to move off stage.
This is made of polystyrene--
Polystyrene?
Polystyrene base, and then
fiberglass inside, for strength.
There's a practical
pyrotechnic we
use to make the explosion.
Oh, lovely.
It's a real canon.
That's right.
Right.
Moving on to this, now.
This is from Peter
Pan, isn't it?
Yes, this is going to
be in Peter Pan.
This is Tinkerbell's castle,
or little house.
Now, this is made out of
plastic tubing, this is
Styrofoam--
which is a little bit
like polystyrene--
but the magic is these all light
up, and how we do that
is-- if you lift the lid--
Oh, my word.
--we see fiber optics.
These black spaghetti-like
things are fiber optics.
And in here is the projector,
which is the light source.
So it all flashes
and twinkles.
That's right.
That's amazing.
And again, it's got
a fiberglass rock,
and its all on wheels.
So on casters again?
That's right.
So it's all very maneuverable?
Yes.
And what is this crispy stuff?
Well, this is a bit of plumber's
jute scrim, which is
covered in PVA and in glitter.
Right, because it's
quite stiff, that?
That's right.
Lovely.
Now this has to be one
of my favorites.
This is a sedan chair,
isn't it?
No, it's a palanquin.
A palanquin?
All right, what's
the difference?
Well, the palanquin has wheels
at the back and pulled by one
person, the sedan chair has four
people on each corner,
and it's lifted up.
Timber structure, and then the
top of the roof is made of
hardboard, and just trimmed
and painted up.
And it's for Aladdin,
isn't it?
That's right.
And works like a rickshaw,
I think.
That's it.
And one person will
pick it up.
That's marvelous.
Shall we go to the park?
Chop, chop to to the pop shop!
Theater is the world of make
believe, and it's important
that extends to practicalities
on stage.
And starting with a subject
close to my heart, can we
begin with food?
We can, yes.
I want to make some ice cream.
Now, this is dried
mashed potatoes.
Comes in a form like that.
OK?
So--
What, for ice cream?
For ice cream, that's right.
And because the main problem
using ice cream under stage
lights is that, of course, it
melts very quickly, even more
quickly than normal.
And of course, mashed potato
isn't going to do that.
So we'll mix this up to get a
consistency fairly creamy, so
it mimics ice cream, because
when it's finished, it looks
exactly like ice cream.
I would never have guessed
of using something
savory for ice cream.
Well, that's right.
I mean, I've often seen mashed
potato being used for all
manner of meals on the stage.
That's right.
Not ice cream.
And we'll leave that to cool
down now, and we'll go on to
some bread, here.
OK.
That looks like a fairly
ordinary loaf.
It is, but it's been
dried out.
It's heavy.
It is, it's very solid.
You can do it with any loaf.
I happened to make this one
first. You put it in the oven,
very low temperature, and just
heat it for hours and hours
and hours on end, obviously
making sure it's not going to
burn, until it dries
out the inside.
And this will last for about six
weeks without going moldy.
Really?
But you couldn't eat it.
No.
I wouldn't suggest you eat it.
It probably tastes revolting.
This is some spider's web.
Now if you take the other side
of this and stretch it--
you buy this in joke shops.
Children like using it.
Here we are.
This stretches out--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
And how would you use
this on stage?
If you want to make something
look old, or particularly
authentic-- there we
are, we'll put our
Mr. Spider in there.
So for cobwebs?
For cobwebs, that's right, you'd
put it perhaps on the
corner of a window or
something like that.
Amazing.
You can nail that in or stick
it to at the edges.
Stick it with some glue.
Now some drinks.
Now this here is
called caramel.
It's basically just burnt sugar,
but this has actually
been chemically made .
You need to buy it from a
chemist, and it's sterile.
I use a tiny, tiny
little bit of it.
And what are you making first?
I want to make some whiskey
in this glass, here.
And that's just ordinary
water?
It's ordinary water.
Of course, you wouldn't want
to real whiskey on stage.
Well, I don't know.
You only really need a tiny,
tiny little bit of it, and
then just mix it
in very slowly.
So, you shouldn't
use up cold tea?
I thought people use cold
tea for whiskey?
Some people do use cold tea, and
also flat Coca-Cola, but
those tend to go off under the
stage lights very quickly,
especially Coca-Cola, because
it's so sugary.
What does this taste like?
Can I?
Yes, please taste it.
Tell me what it tastes of.
Water.
Exactly.
It tastes of nothing at
all, whereas cold
tea is quite revolting.
Yes.
Now this is some tea
we'll make here.
That's for hot tea?
Well, you can make
it hot or cold.
This is cold, because people who
are in the audience won't
have any idea whether it's
hot or cold, anyway.
If they think it's a
cup of tea, then--
Why couldn't you use
proper hot tea?
Well, you could, but it might be
that you don't want to have
something hot on stage, or that
the person who's drinking
it doesn't like tea.
Right.
Well, that's thoughtful.
That's right.
Here we are.
I've got quite a milky
tea there.
Right.
Good.
All right, another thing
we can make is
some parchment paper.
That's very easy to make.
Here's one that's finished.
Now how did you do that?
Well, this really
is very simple.
Take a tea bag that's just been
nicely dampened, and just
wipe it across the
page, like this.
Here we are.
Wipe this across.
Do all of this side, then turn
it over and do the other side.
And then as it dries, it goes
crinkly and gets quite a nice
parchment effect.
Oh, that's brilliant.
Now I'll let that one
dry on that side.
And that's a dry one?
And that's a dry one.
And that really feels crispy
and crinkly and old.
That's right.
The only thing you have to be
careful about is that you
don't use water-based
inks on there.
Because if you do, of course,
the the ink will spill.
Won't be able to read your
script or your lines.
Let's go back to our ice
cream, over here.
Should be just about ready.
Now let's take a nice
scoop of that.
And our ice cream cornet.
There you are, Christina.
An ice cream just for you.
Must I?
Just steaming away.
Mmm-mmm.
Ham and pea, next.
That's right.
We're clearly on to the
advanced stages
of prop making here.
This is where you make statues
and masks, isn't it?
That's right.
Please explain how
you do that.
Well, this is a full head latex
mask, and this is used
for a dancer who is going
to be a Greek statue.
Now this made from clay.
Carved in clay and then a
plaster mold similar to this
was made over the whole thing.
And then it was turned upside
down like that, with the
plaster mold around it.
And then liquid latex, which we
have here, it's literally
just poured in.
Nice and thick.
You can see how that
works like that.
Now the trick with latex in a
plaster mold- and it's got to
be a plaster of Paris mold--
is that you just
gently pat it.
It gets all the air
bubbles out.
And plaster of Paris has
a marvelous property.
It sucks liquids into itself,
so the longer you leave it,
the thicker the mold is.
It looks like yogurt.
That's right.
Now this was left overnight--
24 hours--
and it's quite a thick latex.
So that was just in 24 hours?
Well, you leave this overnight,
for 24 hours, and
then you pour out the residue.
And you leave it to set.
And the skin is what's left.
That's right.
It smells horrible.
It's the ammonia.
Now the longer you leave it, the
thicker the latex will be.
So that's one process.
Now this is made out of
fiberglass metal.
Now this is a set dressing
for the pirate
ship in Captain Hook.
Now this is a very
special mold--
that's the finished product,
and this is the
mold it came from.
Now this is silicon--
hot melt silicon called
Gelflex--
and it comes in little blocks
like this, and you can carve
it up like jelly.
Put in this big melting pot, and
three or four hours later
it'll liquefy and you can pour
it onto your original.
Now this was carved in clay,
and a wooden box was formed
and this liquid silicone--
which goes up to 150 Celsius--
was poured over the thing.
And four hours later it sets,
you take your clay out and you
are then left with
a mold like this.
Which we can make fiberglass,
resin, or even pour lead into
if you like.
So that's a silicone mold.
This is made in fiberglass.
And this is a mask to go on
a cornice of a castle.
A little bit of coat hanger
wire was just used to clip
over the back of the scenery.
It's actually quite light.
I expected it to--
I mean, it sounds metallic,
so I expected it
to feel that way.
Again this was made in
a very similar way.
Again, clay original, and this
is a latex mask-- the same
latex we've used here.
Now this is mask of
sad and happy.
Now we can make two mother
molds to support this.
The clay original is then
covered with latex, and when
that latex is set--
because it's very floppy, we
then cover it we plaster of
Paris, like that.
Scoop it around, and when that
sets, we turn the whole thing
upside down, scoop out the clay,
wash this out, and then
we are ready to then make
fiberglass impression.
And then we have an original.
If you're doing anything really
large and the plaster
of Paris is too heavy,
we can --
again, say latex--
but instead of a plaster of
Paris mother mold, we use a
fiberglass mother mold,
which is much lighter.
And this is made in exactly the
same way, except this is
papier mache.
Now this was made in clay--
again, a clay original--
and then plaster of Paris was
then carved and poured onto
this clay original.
Then the clay was scooped out
and we papier mached inside.
Now this goes over
an actor's head.
and it's Velcroed.
Right.
That's cool.
So one half goes like
that, the other half
slots in like this.
And we tuck in the Velcro
tabs like so.
Dark in here.
How do I do then?
Wonderful.
Props are an integral part of
any play for a performer, and
you usually notice them when
they're not there.
That's what I have discovered.
Tell us about where you keep
props all together?
Right.
Well the best place, obviously,
to keep props is on
a props table.
And you tend to have one either
side of the stage
behind the set.
This is because if you don't
have a specific place to put
something, you'll tend to find
that the actor involved will
just leave something where
they last finished.
So you might find that a glass
is left in the middle of the
floor, or something goes back
to the dressing room.
Which obviously isn't ideal,
because the stage manager then
takes half an hour afterwards to
find everything and return
it to base.
Now, if you take making a props
table, the best way is
to take a table and then
cover it in some paper.
This is just lining paper.
You could use the back
of wallpaper.
Stick this in down here.
And then set your props out on
it in the most sensible way.
So obviously, if something's to
go on first, you'd want it
nearest the edge of the table
that was nearest the door.
And then you need to make
a home for a prop.
Now here we've got a comedy saw
to go on somebody's head.
And in order to make a home for
it, you draw around it, so
then when you look at the props
table you're going to be
under no doubt whatsoever--
Not in this case, anyway.
-- that it goes in this home.
And then when you've drawn
around it, you write
underneath it.
Nice big letters, because
remember, it's going to be
dark back here when
the show's on.
And that's the home
now for this saw.
Every time you come and look at
the props table, if there's
a gap there, you know
it's gone missing.
Somebody needs to put it back.
Let's create a home for these
slippers as well.
The reason you write down the
side of it, is if you're doing
something like a
cup and saucer,
obviously, it's just round.
So you need to know what's
come from there.
There we are.
Slippers.
Pair.
That's right.
It could be that their both
left feet, and there's a
particular reason why it
is that for the show.
In which case you would specify
that underneath.
Two left feet.
That's right.
Could be just an insult,
of course.
And then, see let's
do this one.
This is a letter.
Now this is going to
be a running prop.
Running prop?
What does that mean?
A running prop is something
that's going to
be used each show.
It could be something like a
cigarette that's smoked each
show or a sweet.
Oh, I see.
Used up.
That's right.
Disposable prop.
So the stage manager will need
to have made sure that there's
enough of those for the number
of performances you have. Say
we've used that--
So I've gone, ah, I wish I'd
never heard from him.
--on stage, and now we need to
make sure that before the next
show goes up, we've got
something to fill that gap.
And that will immediately remind
us that we need another
running prop.
Now we've got homes for these,
what you tend to find-- if we
didn't have this, all this
beautiful space behind us
which is lovely and clear--
will be full of all
bits of props that
people have left behind.
For tripping over.
Exactly--
tripping over, and
getting broken.
Now all you need to do now is
train your actors to put
things back on the table
and telling you if
something gets broken.
So that you can fix it, if it
needs to be fixed immediately,
and then do a proper repair
before the show
goes up the next day.
Because one of the main problems
you come up against
is people coming to you two
minutes before they need it
saying, oh, it's broken.
And you say, when
did it break?
And they say, last night.
Not very helpful.
Not very helpful, no.
So check your props.
Check your props is the
essence of this.
So meanwhile we've got
an empty space
for our running letter.
So we're coming back to check
this empty space.
We think, right, need
a new letter.
There we are.
And we've completed
our props table.
Ready for the next
performance.
Here before us is a slice
of theatrical history.
Now Diane, we are amongst
pantomime costumes ready to go
out on hire, aren't we?
Yes.
And two of them have a rather
special story, don't they?
These two?
Yes.
They come from the film The
Slipper and the Rose.
The original film?
Yes, I believe they do.
Well, that must be at
least 20 years old.
Yes.
They were brought in
by the theater, at
least 14 years ago.
And as you can see, the most
beautiful fabrics and trimmings.
Very delicately done.
And also, very heavy.
Gracious.
That's extraordinary.
And have they been worn
often in those years?
Oh, yes.
I mean, they're costumes that go
on hire virtually ever year
plus during the year.
Because as you can
see, they're so--
Very well made.
--beautifully made
and durable.
Do you dry clean them?
Yes.
They go on hire, and then when
they come back they are dry
cleaned and then refurbished.
And I maintain this is why they
have stayed as beautiful
as they have over the years,
because the grime can't get in
to hurt the fabrics.
Now these gorgeous things once
were bridesmaid's dresses, is
that right?
That's correct.
Yes.
These were some dresses that
were brought in by a director,
and I redesigned them to make
the chorus girls' ballgowns.
Presumably adding the sequins?
Yes, that's right.
We put the panel down the
front, using the calico
underneath to strengthen
it and give it body.
And also buying organza and
making more of the sleeve, and
also making panniers.
Beautiful.
And talking of panniers,
this is outrageous.
Who is this for?
This was actually Cyril
Fletcher's, in fact.
Really?
Yes, he used to have all
his costumes made.
And this is rather splendid,
because in actual fact, it
hasn't a battery to the
back, and a light
comes on the flower.
That's the flower?
Yes, each side of the--
Was this a dame's costume?
This is an ugly sisters
costume.
Ugly sisters.
Rather like having a sofa on,
this dress, isn't it?
And more uglies--
Lots more uglies.
--costumes I would think.
Yes, rather splendid.
And this is rather gorgeous.
Yes, this was worn by Wayne
Sleep in Goldilocks.
And this is an example of making
and designing costumes
for dancers.
As you see, this expands,
so he has
complete freedom of movement.
These are the trousers?
Same with his trousers.
He can dance, do the
splits, whatever.
Like a second skin.
That's Lycra, is it?
That's right.
Gorgeous.
And moving on to this beautiful
salmon effect thing.
Now who is this for?
Well, this was made for Georgina
Hale, who was our
fairy godmother.
And the director particularly
wanted her to be ultraviolet--
UV. And as you can imagine,
when he said this, I--
he really wanted her
in one dress.
And you can imagine--
I couldn't imagine the fairy
godmother in that color, but
by putting the white organza
over the top , it softened it.
But it still gave
the UV effect?
Yes, it still gave
the UV effect.
All the jewelry at the
front, we actually
take from our stock.
Right.
And it's gorgeous.
And stiff wings, as well.
Yes that's right.
Yes.
She used to use it.
Diane, I've never been able to
wear something like this.
I've never had the chance
to, really.
Could you do me as
a fairy princess?
Well, we can try.
Diane, we're now in the
workroom, the hub of where it
all happens in the theater.
That's right.
Yes.
Definitely.
What are you doing now?
At the moment, I've just cut
out the calico cotton mount
for a skirt.
And all our costumes are
in fact, mounted
onto a cotton backing.
Mainly four the fact of the
strain, because when we make a
costume, we have to make sure
they're really strong and they
will stand up to--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
--as well as doing the run
that we expect from them.
So this is for a character
in Peter Pan, is it not?
That's right.
This is for one of
the dancers.
Splendid.
And that's made of
velvet, isn't it?
That's right, yes.
It's a rustic velvet.
Beautiful.
And that will then go on
hire for a Peter Pan
production, or anything?
Well, it will, in fact, be
as a separate skirt.
Yes.
Talking about skirts, I know
Lisa is working on
another one over here.
That's right.
Yes.
Who is this one for?
This is for another
chorus girl.
And it's an Edwardian skirt.
It's very heavy.
It's very heavy, yes.
But of course, it does
have to be strong.
And in actual fact, we don't
have to think about movement
for these particular costumes,
as it's going to
be just like a picture.
The girls are not dancing.
The boys are not dancing.
I think they'll be
glad for that.
So they are just standing.
Lisa has done her pleating, and
also she's put a placket
in the back.
Right.
Very beautifully done, if I
might say so, not being a
seamstress myself.
Now, how would you do up a
heavy skirt like this?
Because you obviously wouldn't
put a zip in, would you?
No.
No, what we do--
Lisa has put the placket in,
and then what we do, we use
really large poppers.
Holy moly, they're
very, very big.
-poppers.
And also at the waistband
we would then use--
we call them trouser
hooks and bars.
We thread a piece of tape
through the trouser hook, and
then we sew it on, and then
just secure here.
And this then doesn't
come off.
Because when they move--. if
you use thread, it cuts
through, but it won't cut
through the tape.
And then also, that's the
actual bar that we use.
Right.
Brilliant.
Now I know also that at this
theater, you have a whole
store of your own costumes.
You update them, don't
you, as well?
Yes.
Alter them for different
shows.
That's right.
This is one.
Yes, this is that a jacket that
we actually got out and
we want to reuse it.
It is quite old.
This is quite old.
It's been here for at
least 15 years.
Goodness.
And what we've done--
we cheated a little bit, because
obviously we have
budgets to keep to.
And what we're going to do is--
we're actually going to
attach this front inside
the jacket.
So that actually gets attached
down like that.
Note that this is all being
backed and boned.
Oh, it's boned as well.
Yes, that's right.
And also we have
used hook tape.
A tip with hook tape
is the fact that--
how you would never use a zip,
because a zip will break and
pull open, but not all
the hooks will come
off in one go, quickly.
Right.
Oh, that's brilliant.
And this braid is all
added as well?
That's all added, which is being
done at this minute.
And then we've actually made a
skirt, in fact, to go with it,
which is made ready
for fitting.
Right--
So, it's a process of make and
mend really, isn't it?
You're mending all the time.
Yes, that's right.
Diane, one of the most popular
characters in the pantomime is
the principal boy.
That's correct.
Now it must be very confusing
to children to see girls
playing boys and men
playing women.
I don't know why it should
be so, but it is
traditional, isn't it?
It is very traditional, yes.
Now, I rather fancy being
principal boy myself, and you
thought I might make a rather
good Dick Whittington.
Have you managed to find
something for me?
Well, yes, I have. In fact,
I think the coloring--
Oh, lovely.
--suits you.
Oh, yes.
I think I can probably
get used to that.
I'll just slip it on.
Oh, yes, I like this.
And the color is so
right on you.
Very nice.
Oh, I could get used to this.
We need to make your
legs look longer.
We're giving you some
really high boots.
Good gracious.
Not just any, but high
heeled boots.
These are thigh boots which are
traditionally worn by a
principal boy.
Indeed.
I'm gonna need a hand.
We'll manage.
That's it.
That's right.
Oh, yes, a bit taller now.
That's right, yes.
And we need to get your
hair off your face.
Oh, right.
And also we'll give you a hat,
which we've got ready.
Complete the picture.
That's right.
Now, principal boys, do they
always wear fishnet tights?
Not always.
Often support tights.
And often, if they don't use
thigh boots, they then have
very high court shoes.
The idea is to keep the
principal boy tall and show
lots of leg--
and a long leg.
That's probably why I've never
been cast as principal boy.
I think you will--
After today.
And now, hats.
And I'll show you how not
to put to your hat on.
That looks absolutely
dreadful.
But you put it on like this--
really stunning.
I see.
Right.
So, I feel complete now.
In fact, I think I feel a
thigh slap coming on.
Oh, yes.
Yes, I like this.
However, I'm not sure I'd make
it to London in these.
Diane, the moment has come.
You did promise me you could
turn me into a fairy princess.
Yes.
How about Cinderella
at the ball?
Well, all things are possible.
Yes, you look wonderful.
This is Cinderella, yes?
That's right.
This gown was made for Annabel
Croft when she was the
Cinderella at the
Theatre Royal.
When I came to designing it, I
thought I should look at the
design through the
eye of the child.
And I wanted the children to
go to Annabel and say, you
look beautiful.
And I must admit, this is
exactly what did happen.
So it was very nice.
Splendid.
And how do you begin with
a dress like this?
Well, to start with, we
obviously have to
think about the base--
the crinoline underneath.
But you can see, you make the
crinoline underneath--
that's all the wires--
then obviously, we have to make
petticoats to go over, so
that we don't see any wires.
And then yet another
silver fabric.
Because I wanted to keep it all
sparkly, we then put the
white organza over the top.
So when Cinderella moves,
it sparkles, it
lights, very well.
And the diamante helps
that, doesn't it?
That's right.
That also helps.
This is all sewn on by hand.
Little things like this were
made up especially.
And the same with this front--
they're all small diamantes
that were
individually sewn on.
Goodness, it must have taken
you forever to do all that.
Yes, it did take quite
a long time.
And obviously, all the
bodice is boned.
Yes, I can feel that.
That's wonderful.
So now all we're missing
is the final touch.
Well, Diane, we have a
choice of two wigs.
Which should it be, I wonder?
Well, I think we'll go
for Cindarella's wig.
First of all, we need to make
sure we've got your hair well
out of the way.
We've already clipped it up,
and we have here an old
stocking, which we've cut in
half and put a knot in.
Which is a very good way of
getting rid of the hair.
Getting rid of your
stockings as well.
Yes.
You can, in fact, get
wig nets, but
this is just as efficient.
That's right.
We've got rid of--
I look like a peanut.
Now if we take the wig and--
if you can, in fact, hold the
front on your forehead.
OK.
That's right.
And then I'll pull it from
the back, very tightly.
And in actual fact, you would
clip it to your hair.
What?
With grips?
With grips.
And clip it right though.
Make sure it was firmly on.
Yes, firmly secured.
Wonderful.
Instant hairdo.
That's correct.
Amazing.
Yes.
Then we need to put--
Earrings on?
--some more jewels.
Lovely.
That's right.
And a bracelet.
I think that's right, and
then the headdress.
We have, in fact, got a small
tiara today, but in actual
fact, you can often use an
ostrich feather with some
diamante on, which just
go across the side.
Ah.
My prince awaits.
Well, no prizes for
getting what our
design subject is today.
And although we are very used
to people dressing up for
pantomimes as goblins and
fairies and wicked witches and
all the rest of it--
animals play a large part in
each annual pantomime.
And this wonderful chap--
Ian, you're going to tell
us all about it.
This is right.
This crocodile-- what's his
name, first of all?
He must have a name?
Well, we haven't actually
got a name for him--
just big bad croc.
But he's Captain Hook's enemy.
This
Is wonderful.
And this is he how he works.
And look-- fully working
eyes, as well.
Now, there's someone in here.
We have to say that.
Are you all right in there?
Oh, yes.
Let's get him out.
Right.
What's it made of?
This is definitely boil
in the bag job.
Boil in the bag.
Well, this is latex, steel--
and this is how it's made.
That's incredible.
And you can feel the
heat rising.
Can you breath in, Paul?
Relax.
That's it.
Well done.
OK.
And out he comes from
the cocoon.
It's not something you'd like
to do eight times a week.
No, not eight nights a week.
It's based on a boiler suit, and
the actor's legs work the
back legs of the crocodile.
And the head works the head?
And the arms work--
That's right.
So it's like crawling
on all fours.
It's not a quick change.
But how long could someone stay
in something like this?
The most--
about 15 minutes at the very,
very most, because it's so
hot, that they will dehydrated
very quickly.
Is it quite hard to physically
work, Paul?
Yes, it is.
To move across.
Yes.
It's very effective, though.
Very hard on the chest.
Now, how we make this--
if you come inside, you can see
it's internal workings.
Now what we've got here is an
aluminum frame, which makes
the arms. And it's on
a cross system.
Is that what you began with?
That's right.
So there's a big wooden and
aluminum framed section, in a
cross section, to make the
arms and the main body.
And there's a big padding for
the chest. And in here--
let's turn it around--
we have a cap.
A skull cap, where the
actor's head goes in.
And this operates the head.
Now these cables are bicycle
cables for brake systems, and
there are levers down in the
feet, which operate the eyes
and the jaw movement.
How long did it take
you to make?
It took three weeks to make.
Solidly?
That's right.
And how old is he?
He's about 12 years old.
This is originally done at a
theater hall in Plymouth.
And has it been used
every year?
Almost every year.
That's extraordinary.
So which one of you is
longer in the tooth?
I think definitely me.
So Dave, we've got the lights
down here on the bars, but
it's what we do them that's
important, isn't it?
Yes.
Because a badly lit actor might
be upstaged by the set.
Yes, and don't forget-- a badly
lit actor is also an
unheard voice, possibly.
Very true.
That's right.
Now there are three basic
directions to light an actor
from, aren't there?
Yes.
That most important way would
be from the front, to ensure
that the face is visible.
But it can give quite a flat
texture, can't it?
Yes, you need to be careful to
keep the angle to one side.
Don't go straight to the front,
because that will
flatten the face completely.
The nose will disappear.
Yes.
Second way is from the back.
Back light separates the
performer from the background.
And the third way is from the
front and at a low level.
Right, and that can
be quite spooky.
It shines up under the
chin, doesn't it?
Yes.
It can be used very, very low
level for filling shadows
under the chin, or with a
brighter level of light
creates a nice spooky
shadow behind.
Right.
Now there are five different
lanterns, really, that we tend
to use for lighting an
actor, aren't there?
First one's a flood.
Tell us something
about a flood.
Floods are usually only used
for lighting backdrop.
They're a nice, even spread
of light, but they are,
otherwise, uncontrollable.
Right.
So you can't do a
great with them?
No.
How about a Fresnel?
Most useful lantern
in the range.
Can be adjusted from a fairly
tight spot right out to almost
a flood position.
But it has quite soft
edges, doesn't it?
Nice soft edges.
The lanterns blend in nicely
with one another, lighting
different areas on the stage.
Now a profile spot, that gives
very hard edges, doesn't it?
Profile spots are normally
used for lighting an
individual point, yes.
A hard edge.
Some can be focused back to
soft, although some don't have
that facility at all.
Right.
Now you can get a
zoom profile.
Now what's better about
a zoom profile?
Well, a zoom profile
has two lenses.
You can focus it to be a hard
edge beam or a soft beam, or
adjust the diameter
of the beam.
So you can have a large
spot or a small one?
Yes.
All right.
Now, you can get PAR
cans, as well.
When would we use a PAR can?
PAR cans, in a drama setting,
are normally used for light
through windows--
sunlight in particular.
They're nice and powerful.
They can't be focused.
Right.
So you tend to buy the type
of PAR can that you
actually want to use.
You do, as a rule.
Yes.
You do have a certain amount of
adjustment over the angle
of the beam.
The beam is oval and you
can swivel it around.
But that's the only
adjustment.
Now we've got a zoom
profile down here.
Would you like to show me
how you'd rig this?
Right.
Well, the lantern is in the
stored position, standing on
the front end, which-
Is that so it protects
it's lens?
It protects the lens, and it's
the most stable position.
The first part of rigging is
to actually hook the hook
clamp over the barrel.
Right.
Making sure, of course, not to
catch any of the cables that
are running underneath.
Yes, it's not a good idea
to screw the clamp
into lighting cables.
No, not really.
Make sure that clamp
is nice and tight.
That's whats keeps it secure.
That actually keeps it secure.
Right.
And then we've got
the safety chain.
Most important-- the
safety chain.
If you're hiring equipment in,
make sure that the company
does supply appropriate safety
chains to go with the weight
of the lantern that
you're hiring.
But they're actually quite
cheap to buy, as
well, aren't they?
Yes.
Yes, they're not expensive at
all, and it's definitely not
worth having lanterns on your
rig that don't have them on.
No, right.
Now we've got the cable.
Next-- the cable.
What should we do with this?
Secured in a clip, though,
issn't it?
Do all lanterns have that?
No.
You'll find that this is
probably only on some of the
newer lanterns.
Most of the old ones didn't have
this, but it does prevent
too much strain on the
mains connection
to the lantern itself.
Right.
Yes, that's good.
So that will wrap
around there.
Goes off to a plug--
And the plug will get plugged
in over here?
--over there.
Make sure that you have-- before
you fix this cable--
sufficient slack, so that
when you come to focus--
Ah, so it doesn't
get to tight.
Right.
You tip the lantern into it's
focusing position, and you're
going to need to swivel it in
several different directions--
When you come to focus it.
--so that you don't need to
pull that too tightly.
And there we have a
rigged lantern.
So we're rigged now.
We can get on to more
creative things.
Dave, the last time we were
talking, we were talking about
how to rig lights, but where
you draw the power for the
lights is also very important,
isn't it?
Very important, indeed.
Now when you're in a theater
like this, usually the power
will be all on hand.
But if we have to run a lighting
rig off 13 amp
sockets, then how would we
set about doing that?
The easiest way is to remember
that six 500 watt lanterns
will run off one
13 amp socket.
Be careful with that,
though, because
some more modern lanterns--
you may hire actually have
650 watt lamps in them.
Right.
So a kilowatt lamp takes
approximately
four amps to use it.
Four amps, approximately.
Four amps.
But do remember to make sure
that the catering department
don't plug enormous urns and
things into your same circuit.
Otherwise, it's all
going to go bang.
It's all going to
go bang, yes.
Now we've got some gels here.
Now we would use these
to add interesting
effects to the lights.
Is that right?
Right.
Yes.
It's important to decide at
and early stage, I think,
exactly what the production
is going to look like.
Is it going to use
natural colors?
strong colors to
suggest different things.
As a general thing, red- or
pink-colored lights tend to
suggest something that's warm,
and blues tend to suggest
something that's cold.
Yes, This is very true.
And we've got a great variety of
all the different ones that
you can choose.
Now one of the things when
you're using gels, is to
remember that it's additive
color mixing, isn't it?
It's not like paint, where you
mix the colors and it will
eventually get to black.
When you mix gel colors, it
eventually comes to white
light, doesn't it?
Yes, it does.
And so it's always best
to- in advance, say--
perhaps get a torch, and shine
through the various gels onto
a white surface, so that you
know what color you're going
to end up with.
Yes.
I usually do it onto the back
of a hand, actually, because
that gives you an idea
of what it will look
like on flesh tones.
Oh, right.
That's a good idea.
Which is a useful
thing to see.
Especially when you're
lighting actors.
Yes.
Now we can get gobos, as well.
Now, a gobo fits into a profile
spot, doesn't it?
Yes.
You must remember it must
always be a profile.
You can't use them in any
other type of lantern.
They must be in a profile.
This particular one, here,
is a fire one.
But you can get all sorts of
different ones, can't you?
Very large range--
several hundred.
You can have them custom-made,
at a price.
And you find those in
catalogs, do you?
Yes.
Almost all good stage
suppliers will
have a range of these.
Right.
They are, actually, quite
easy to make.
I made a break up gobo.
Here's one that I made.
And all the holes in it would
break up the light nicely,
wouldn't it?
So it was textured, perhaps
for a forest effect or
something like that.
Yes.
They're most often used to
create a dappled effect for
walking through a forest.
A very effective
and very cheap way.
And extremely easy to make.
I made this from an old foil
takeaway carton that you just
cut around the edges of-- just
around here-- and flatten out.
And I took some needle files,
which you can buy in a case.
And they're all different
shapes and sizes.
I use a round one.
And just punch out the holes--
like that.
And fold the edges over
so that you get
a good strong edge.
That's important, isn't it?
Right.
It is important to have--
Then these fit onto a frame.
Here's some that you've
made, here.
And her'es a pumpkin on that
you made earlier on.
Yes.
Very festive.
An important point to remember
with gobos--
they get very hot.
And you need to put them in
upside down and back to front.
Yes.
Otherwise, they come
out all higgeldy
piggeldy They do.
Graham Higgins, from the
Hamlet Theatre Company.
The last time we spoke,
I saw your trailer
full of lots of flats--
which are now up--
and of course that's not
the only thing you
transport, is it?
You have a great deal else
to go in there, as well.
Absolutely.
You can see all the scenery that
the cast have been busy
putting up--
pictures on the walls.
And then you come into
my little job, which
is lights and sound.
Right.
So you take all the lighting and
sound equipment with you?
What we've got-- we've just
bolted onto these uprights-- a
couple of wooden pillars--
because we're not sure what
we're going to find in a
village hall to secure
anything to.
Sure.
They may not have anything
set up at all.
The main thing is we can't go
above three kilowatts, because
we blow the circuit.
That's certainly important.
So proper lights up there, but
the one at the back's the fun
one, because it's just a light
from a do it yourself shop.
Watch the way that lights up.
Ah-ha.
So nothing fancy and
professional?
Nothing.
Look at the foot lights that
we've made ourselves.
40 watt bulbs, just a little
bit of reflective metal--
shall I show you
them coming up?
And they really just light
up the cast. Yes.
And they're quite unusual these
days, but they have a
lovely effect.
Yeah.
It's also useful in a place like
this, because it shows
the cast, so they don't
get into the audience.
Do you want to see the sound?
Oh, yes.
You've got all that, as
well, haven't you?
Yeah.
Brought this from home.
So this is ordinary,
domestic equipment?
Yeah.
CD player and tape.
What I've got set up on here
are some sound effects.
We're going to do
a country scene.
So can I play something
for you?
Please do.
[BIRD SOUNDS PLAYING]
Wouldn't normally see me.
And an alternative one.
We think it's a bit
more woodlandish.
[BIRD SOUNDS PLAYING]
OK.
Rooks.
Yeah.
I'm not a bird fan.
So you would operate
this yourself?
Yeah.
Hiding behind there.
Right.
And you're the only member of
the company who doesn't act,
is that right?
Pretty well, yeah.
Someone has to do this
side of the business.
But they all do other
things as well.
You've seen them--
thy come in, they do the
painting, they put the panels
up, and then they go and get
their makeup on, while I put
the lighting in place.
That's quite unusual, as well,
because normally actors are
actors, and ever shall be.
And that's the way--
They can't just be
actors here.
They've got to come--
one of them's got to pull the
curtains for me, because I
can't be doing the lighting
effects if they're not pulling
the curtains.
That's OK as long as things go
well, but you've got a cast,
and we've got all of them on
stage and you suddenly think--
who is going to shut
the curtains?
And do I do the lights
or shut the curtains?
And it's me that
gets the blame.
There we go.
A shame.
It is.
This is Kay.
And what are you going to do
with Kay this morning?
Well, today we're making Kay--
we're removing her makeup
first-- but we're making her
into a 1940s woman.
So we've already got the hair
done, and so we're getting
into the whole feel of it.
And now I'm just taking
off the makeup to be
able to start it.
Right.
So it's important to come
with a clean face.
Yes, it helps to come with a
clean face, and then you can
put on the other makeup
from there, and start.
So I'm just removing your
lipstick there, Kay.
So you've given Kay a good
covering with foundation for
her '40s lady.
Now, how would she choose
the color for Herself
As I say, what's very important
within the theater
and the stage makeup, is to make
sure it's a pinky tone.
And here I have chosen
really quite a pinky
tone, as you can see.
And we've applied it to the
whole of her face by having
first put on a moisturizer so
that the blending of it is as
good as you can get.
Now can you raise your face for
me, and I can just make
sure that the ears and the neck
are covered, and that you
go down, making sure that
the color is continuous.
There we go.
Is there any particular
difference in color because
it's for a '40s play?
No.
There is a difference in color
as to what's complimentary, in
terms of a female makeup
versus a male makeup,
in terms of a tone.
So the men's tones are tanned,
but the female tones are much
more pinky, and that, then,
is complimentary.
So if Kay is doing
this herself.
She looks in the mirror--
and would she aim for a heavier
color than she would
wear to a party, for example?
Yes.
Definitely more reddy, more
pinky, reddy tones than she
would wear to a party.
Right.
Definitely.
And you're powdering already?
Yes I'm powdering having gone
over the whole of her skin
with a base, yes.
It is quite fine.
It doesn't have to be heavy.
This is before any eye shadow
or anything like that?
Absolutely.
OK, now what I'm doing
just now is finally
putting on the lipstick.
Having defined the eyebrows,
having put on the blue
eyeshadow which is of the
'40s period, having
to find your eyes--
and now it's just putting on a
very strong red that's shaping
and giving full size
to your lips.
OK?
How do you feel?
Very good.
Now, as far as the top
lip is concerned--
if you just close your
mouth for me.
And then you can take that line
a little bit above your
own lip line, here,
just to shape it.
And you do a slight pout--
that's it--
which helps to get the shape.
I'm finishing now with the
blusher, taken at the sides.
Can you suck your cheeks
in for me please?
That's it.
And shape them out to the bone,
lifting and giving highlight.
Right.
And then blending it up
on to the temple.
Now what do you think of that?
I feel I looks like
Jane Russell.
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
So this is Fiona, our heroine.
Is that right?
Yes, it is.
Now what's different about
leading lady makeup?
What's special about that?
Well, what I've done here is
instead of using any of the
theatrical bases, I've put on a
normal street base, and then
I've added red to the color to
make sure it is going to be of
a pinky tone.
Now, you could use lipstick,
and you could use--
What, on the face?
Yes.
And just blend it within the
coloring so that you've
completely worked around.
And do a lifting structure to
the face itself, which is seen
as we blend it in.
Will she not just look hot?
No, because once you've actually
powdered, it all
settles in, because this is
where I was saying how
important it is to have the
soft, pinky tones that work so
well on the stage.
OK, now one of the things you
can do after you put on the
base, is to use the corrective
pencil underneath the eyes,
just to be able to take away
any shadowing there.
And also follow the nose to
mouth line, and blend it away?
Doesn't that make her look
younger, though?
Yes.
Oh, I see.
That's the whole point.
Yes.
In terms of a leading lady, what
one is planning to do in
a situation like this, is to do
the very best to make her
look the best she can look.
Right.
So by doing this side and filing
in your eyebrows, I
think you find that it opens up
your eyes and the attention
goes to the top part
of your face.
Yes.
It's something I never
considered doing, simply
because I have quite heavy
eyebrows anyway.
To actually define
them further I
didn't think was necessary.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Now, having put this line
underneath your eye, just
going out in a straight way--
you now have a gap between the
upper line and the lower line.
So if you look just up at the
ceiling, you can fill in with
some light white to make a
contrast, and therefore make
the eyes look larger.
And that opens up your eye when
you look, and works very
well on stage.
Again, you can take the white,
and go closely underneath
towards the corner
of your eye.
And much more of that is being
used these days, than the red
dot that used to go there.
Now, in this situation, I'm
going to start by using a dark
pencil to define your lips,
to give them shape.
And if you can just
smile for me--
that's it.
Then it helps you to get a good
definition of your mouth
while you're smiling.
And for the fill in,
we'll use pink.
And just go through with that.
And if you'd like to turn your
hea, there, just that little
bit that way-- that's fine.
And again, smile.
Yes, keep smiling.
What it does, is it gives you a
very strong base on which to
apply the lipstick.
That's great.
And then you're done.
Beautiful.
Now you look like good-natured,
genial sort of fellow.
What's Derry about
to do to you?
I believe I'm going
to be turned
into a dastardly villain.
You are.
And a ruggedly dastardly
villain, at that.
So off we go.
We have quite a warm color on
here, just to change the whole
of your skin tone.
Mediterranean villain?
Yeah, I have the feeling
that's exactly what
it's going to be.
Now close your eyes for me.
That's good.
Have you played many
villains before?
I think the first year we did
the pantomime, I played the
evil flesh creep.
Basically, I was done up in
green fluorescent paint.
That was about the limit
of the makeup job.
Green fluorescent?
And I shouted a lot.
Now I think what we'll do, is
we'll darken your mustache.
And for that, for speed, one of
the fastest ways of doing
that is to just use the mascara
wand to go over the
whole of the area, just to bring
in the darkness there.
And then it's another way,
rather than using pencil, to
darken existing eyebrows.
And in this case,
I'm using black.
OK.
Now I'm just finishing off
by doing an eyeliner.
Which again, is absolutely
essential for stage.
Although if I were doing it for
television, I would not
put the eyeliner on, just
because it makes your eyes
look too nice.
And therefore not what we
want from the villain.
Now I'm going to go on to
putting stubble on your face.
And what are you using
there, to put on--
I'm using a stipple sponge--
what's known as a simple sponge,
which is a very good
way of getting the dots
that a beard line
makes on to the skin.
Now, if you'd like to raise your
face up a little bit, you
can then go underneath and give
a good, strong jaw line.
Make sure it does
get in there.
Now, what also helps making
a villainous character, is
making sure that the eyebrows
are closer together.
It produces that distrusting
look.
As well as having done a bit
underneath the eyes to break
up the area there, so that it's
a little bit grubbier in
terms of the shadow
that I used.
So finally, we'll end up with
some powder, just to
finish it all off.
And I'll use quite a dark
powder, just to set it.
And just to go over the whole.
Would you look up for me?
It's interesting, Derry, that
you actually haven't
overstated this at all, but
it's still very effective.
Well, it's one of those things
that less can often be more,
in terms of what you
were saying.
Just little things, but
they will still read.
There we go.
Now also just adding in that
touch of lift to the eyebrow,
to make it slightly more
villainous on both sides, does
add in that detail
of aggression.
That's better.
You see, I think that will
give him the lift.
Do you feel slightly
meaner now?
Yes, can you complete the
picture for us now, Malcolm,
and look really mean.
Oh, yes.
Iris, you're very brave to have
offered yourself for this
task, this process.
Yes.
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
Now, underneath that, just
because with age you do get
the eyes is hollowing out--
I'm going to just come around
here and demonstrate with a
bit of dark brown and end
up circling the eye.
And going deep into the side
of the eye there, to socket
it, because you're hitting all
the areas we she would
naturally age.
Sag.
Sorry.
No, that's OK.
The important one is going from
the nose to the mouth
line, and then from there,
hitting the corners of the
mouth because they
tend to go down.
It is naturally on the face.
And then highlight it to
make it stand out more.
Now to help on this side--
again, taking it around, under
the eye, and pushing it in.
And highlighting just in
that area for bagging
that you have there.
And that gives a puffiness
underneath the eye, with the
darkening there.
And then here at the side--
if you pull in your
cheeks for me.
You just hit up--
I've got the wig
on there, now--
but you can do just by the
cheekbone and under the
cheekbone from the side, And
again, lifting up with the
highlighting on the cheekbone.
Now, for stage, you're not
blending as much, because of
the fact of it reading
from a long distance.
But you can just blend in--
just for the purposes of showing
you here, for camera--
those effects so that they
shadow the face.
Now the other thing to
concentrate on with aging, is
to make sure that you don't
forget to do the
neck and age the neck.
And as I've done here, is to
make the lips smaller and
thinner, because they do tend
to lose their size.
And finish by blending and
a touch of powder.
There we go.
Just break that down.
There we are.
Iris, go on your pension.
How do you feel?
Old.
Can you say that would
really help you in
constructing your character?
I mean, if he went on
stage with that?
Knowing that you
look like that?
Oh, yes.
Definitely.
That would assist you.
Yes.
Always, I think, if you've
got makeup like this.
Let's see what happens when it
all comes off, shall we?
That would be nice.
We'll start with the wig.
All right.
We've got all of the-- you want
to give me a hand just so
I don't pull.
There we go.
Right then, [? Iris, ?]
we'll get this all
off quickly for you.
You usually use cream.
What are you using?
I'm using baby wipes, would you
believe, because it is one
of the fastest, most effective
ways of getting
off the makeup quickly.
I'd never have thought
of that.
Back to normal again.
Nice to have you back.
Thank you.
That's better.
Now we come to, arguably, the
favorite character in
pantomime--
the dame.
The dame.
You can have fun today, Derry.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
What have you done so far?
So far, I've actually just put
on a base, some powder, and
some general rouging to bring
up the colorful tone.
Right.
So it's quite pink.
It's quite pink, yes it is.
And you're going to
go on next to?
The eyes.
I'm going to start
to do those.
And we'll go on to what you call
a very bright turquoise,
to go with the pink wig.
Ever so fetching.
They should be the new
colors for next year.
Now, if you don't have any
lashes to hand-- and the
bigger and the sillier they are,
the better they are for
the dames--
then you can just do strokes of
eyelashes onto an eye line
to create the lash effect.
Is that blue or black?
This is black.
And doing small ones
in between to
fill spaces up there.
And it tickles.
And it tickles, does it?
But then it takes
up that space.
And then open your eyes.
And there we have
some eyelashes.
And now onto the big cheeks.
They're always essential.
Can you pull your cheeks
in for me?
That's it.
And taking them out and up.
Dick, you've played dame
often, haven't you?
Yes, indeed.
How does Derry's makeup on you
today relate to what you
normally do?
Well, I'm very pleased to see
she's got some thinner brushes
than we're used to.
Because the the ones in the
village usually have creosoted
the odd bomb before we
get down to this.
Now on to the lips.
Over the top, pantomime lips.
This is where I need
the concentration.
And of course, then we have
the wig for the final bit.
Would you like to hold the front
of that for me, as we
just pull it down, being
sure to just get it
over your ears there.
And again, on this side, there.
That's it.
OK.
And that's it, dear.
And this is Lana, and Derry
has a completely different
exercise today.
You're going to turn her, not
into a human being, but into--
An animal.
--an animal.
And I'm not going to tell
you which animal.
You have to guess that.
OK.
First we're going to have to
take your hair up and away.
And I'll just continue putting
in the pink, and if you lift
your head ever so slightly
for me, Lana.
That's it.
And keep on tilting your head
back and close your eyes.
And I can fill in this whole
area, here, and match the
other side.
Now the thing that has to be
paid attention to here, is the
length of time it takes to
block out the eyebrows,
because without them having been
soaped, it does take a
little time just to make them
disappear entirely.
And now, the final bit here, on
the eyes, is to just take
the line underneath and across
and out there before coming
down onto the lips.
And filling those in.
It's very sweet.
Have you used blue for
a particular reason?
It's actually a purply-blue, but
the blue colors do tend to
read well on stage.
Would you not use black, ever?
You could use black and gray,
and those would also read.
But it's just I thought it was
prettier to have pink.
Yeah.
Like that.
And then going on to the pink.
Whiskers.
I think you might just
have given us a
rather large clue, there.
Even if they are blue.
Even with the dots here.
What we're going for.
One, two.
There we are.
Now all we need are the ears.
And secured into place.
And there you are.
Oh, yes.
Sweet.
I think I knew it was going
to be a rabbit, but not a
lop-eared bunny.
Derry, that is some wig.
What are we doing here?
We're into the restoration
period now, and so, basically,
because the ladies at that time
made their faces pale to
be aristocratic, is the best
way of putting it.
And when they added all the
hearts and the dots on their
face, it was to give signals of
whether they were free, or
what political party
they belonged to.
It was really quite interesting
makeup at the time.
Is that white?
This is a mixture of white and
cream together, and applied
with a sponge.
And water-based?
Yes it is.
Just for ease of application.
And then what I do need to do
is just go up to the wig
there, just make sure that--
quite often, as I said, it is
unusual to put the wig on
first, but as long as you make
sure that you literally get
the makeup base right up to
the edges there where the
hairline is, you
should be fine.
And then again, down on the
neck, to make sure that it
goes to balance wherever
the costume goes.
Right.
Now we're using the blue
eyeshadow that they used
during this renaissance time.
And this time it went
right the way up
to the eyebrow level.
So that is just applied right
from the corner of the inside
of the eye and blended out.
Derry, do you know what they
would have used in those days
for eyeshadow?
What it would have
been made of?
Or makeup at all?
Well, a lot of the makeup that
they used-- they enameled
their faces, and a lot of it
contained lead, and it caused
serious problems. But their
vanity seemed to override it
at that time.
Enamel?
Yes, and they apparently
went to Paris.
But their skin couldn't
breathe.
Not, it couldn't, and that's why
it was a rather fatal way
of looking beautiful.
Now, with the eyebrows, they
were pretty exaggerated in
terms of the time of the
restoration era.
Very dramatic, so we'll start
off and build these into
something quite substantial
here, as Pauline's own
eyebrows are quite slim there.
Now just take another brush
just to blend that
in and shape it.
The strength of this was to go
with the beauty spots and
everything's painted black.
Now, the men wore makeup,
too, didn't they?
Yes, but it was powder
that they used.
Just powder?
Just powder, as opposed
to the makeup that
the women were using.
Using a powder puff on to the
cheek sometimes really helps,
because otherwise you're taking
off makeup as you're
putting it on your face.
So having that powder puff that
you use yourself, to even
put things on.
Whatever makeup you're doing.
Yes, whatever makeup you're
doing, it does stop--
OK, now I'm just going to do a
little heart, here, on your
cheek, which they used
to do, as I said,
to signal were free.
And just fill that in.
When you say free, do
you mean available?
Available is the word, yes.
So just see how much of a
shape I can get there.
There we go.
There's a whole subtext going
on with these characters,
isn't there?
What with what the
face is saying
and they're fan language.
All of that that they had--
a very interesting period.
Just there on the point.
It's quite outrageous,
as you would say.
And this is just finishing off
the lips with this cupid
shape, with the lips
close together.
And then, you are done.
Now that is a restoration
lady for the stage.
Oh, yes.
All ready for a romantic night
in with the Scarlet Pimpernel.
Now Derry, we're getting into
heavy character makeup here,
by the look of it.
You're whitewashing Helen.
What exactly are you doing?
I'm turning Helen into
a Geisha girl.
A geisha girl.
Yeah, a geisha girl.
Oh, wonderful.
A traditional, Japanese
Mikado lady.
Absolutely.
So we're starting off with
the completely and
utterly white face.
Right.
Is that the best way to cover?
With a great brush like that?
Well, it's the fastest
way of covering, yes.
And you can get a, hopefully,
very even finish as a result
of using it with a brush and
adding water to the pancake.
Wonderful.
Have you done anything to
her eyebrows, other
than paint them out?
No.
At the moment all I've
done is just go over
them with the white.
And what I must remember
to do is the is the
ears and the neck.
That's a water-based makeup
you're using, isnt it?
Yes, this particular
one is water-based.
Does it go stiff
when it dries?
No, it doesn't, actually.
They seem to have perfected
them, so it just
gives perfect coverage.
I guess it being water-based,
the skin can still
breathe, can't it?
So she shouldn't get too
hot under there.
No, she won't get hot, and
it does stay well.
But you do have to get it on
quite quickly, so that
it all evens out.
Now, is this traditional
makeup?
Is this how the Japanese would
do it when they're dressing up
as Kabuki women?
Yes, this is taken from the
actual, authentic, style of
the geisha girl.
Now, Derry, what's
all the pink for?
What does that signify?
That signifies a high-class
geisha.
Oh, really?
So lower class doesn't
have pink.
Right.
So it would just be
completely white.
Yes.
But this is to suggest the
high-class geisha, on either
side of the nose.
In terms of doing
the eyebrows--
this is coming from the research
one has done to look
at how the geisha girls make
themselves up and to
authenticate it, in terms of
reproducing the makeup.
Yes.
Gosh, doesn't that make a
difference straight away?
And that short?
Yes.
And then we'll balance it up
on the other side, here.
And now the special
geisha lips, which
are very cupid like.
So therefore, I'm going
from the inside
of Helen's lip shape.
And filling in with lipstick
color, which is an extremely
bright red.
Which makes a very
dramatic look.
That's beautiful.
She looks rather like
a doll, now.
Yes.
I think, absolutely, that's why
they've always felt the
geisha's very doll-like.
And I think then, once we put
the wig on, you really see.
It helps, too, with Helen having
dark eyes, doesn't it?
Yes, and do you see how it
centerizes the mouth to be so
small there?
And then, even without putting
the wig on, if you hold, you
can start to see how--
if I took the face-- if you just
turn that way, and then
you can see.
OK, now put the wig on,
just as the final bit.
So if you'd like to hold the
front of the wig, there, for
me, and pull it down
at the front, as I
pull down at the back.
That's it.
And then--
OK, relax your hands as I adjust
you ears into that, and
pull it out.
And then the other side out.
And pull this back,
to get the shape.
And then you start to get
the whole feeling.
Now, what they would
have is lots of
decoration within the hair.
So I'll put those in
here in the back.
Oh, that's wonderful.
And what she's got in
her hair? are they--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
No, they're a couple of pencils
used to look like
chopsticks, just as you have
some kind of dressing.
But as, indeed, when you mix
with the wardrobe, then you've
got all the various finishing
bits to add to that wig.
Wonderful.
There you go.
If you just put some wax through
your hair, just to be
able to start getting
the period hairdo
for a leading man.
And which period are
you doing, Derry?
What are you going to create?
An Edwardian man.
Oh, wonderful.
An Edwardian leading man.
So what we need to do here, is
to just get a middle parting.
So if we take it from the top
of the nose and go right the
way through, then hopefully,
we will be able to
separate that out.
And do the other side, here.
And have a starting point.
And then we can sort of roll it
a bit to see if we can get
it to stay flatter, just by
pushing with the hands.
That's better.
He's looking nice
and glowy now.
Yes.
But this does hold very well for
the length and duration of
the performance.
And again, this is just taking--
as with all makeups--
down the neck, and just
blend it away.
And again, across the ears.
It looks quite healthy.
Tan, isn't is?
It is.
Will it look like
that on stage?
No.
It will look like a natural
color on stage.
But that is, it's quite
warm there.
It looks like the sort of makeup
that you might have
footlights for, for melodrama.
Yes.
Would that be right?
And also, as I said, you'd be
able to register this right
from the back of the audience,
with all that.
What I've done just now, is to
add some more water, so that I
can put it on to this man.
Just gently close your eyes.
That's it.
So that he can literally
be able to blend it
right into the skin.
That's taken off some of the
heaviness, hasn't it?
It has.
When you literally have been
heavy-handed, the way to do
it, is to just add more water
onto the sponge and blend.
Now, normally, one does wear
protection when you're putting
on spirit gum, so that
it doesn't go
all over your clothes.
But a very good way for it to be
a preparation for applying
the mustache, is to apply one
layer of the spirit gum to the
top of the upper lip.
And then, with your finger,
literally break up the spirit
gum so it gets very,
very tack.
And it's extremely
tacky, and you're
pulling away, like that.
You know that the spirit gum
is then ready for the
application of putting
on the mustache.
And it also takes off the amount
of shine, as well as
anchors it.
And it really does stick.
OK.
Oh, yes.
I say, that's a good mustache.
A little party.
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
All right.
Instant character.
An instant character.
Your special task, this morning,
I understand, is to
turn Kate into a wicked witch.
It is, indeed.
And I'm going to start by
putting a black cape around
Kate to get her into the mood.
And just put a clip
in the back, here.
And start off by taking the
corner of her eyebrow away,
just here, and soaping
it away.
That's a bar of soap, is it?
It's a bar of soap, and it's
been sitting in water to
moisten it up, and this way you
can take away the latter
eyebrows to be able to
get a sharper line.
And you can make up over
that, can you?
I can, indeed.
You just have to allow
that to dry.
OK.
And now we go on to applying
the green.
The whole process of turning
into a wicked witch.
And that's on a sponge,
and that's
water-based makeup, is it?
No, this is a grease
that I'm using.
So just to give variety
withing the different
demonstrations of makeup, this
is a palette of grease.
And just a mixture of green and
white together, just to
get more subtle shades, which
will be the foundation to
apply to the whole
of the face.
A little bit more
coverage, there.
Why green, I wonder?
I don't know why it's always
been associated, but you never
do seem to see witches as any
other color other than green.
And the black wigs, and
the black peaked hats.
Perhaps they're very
jealous people.
Yes, I think they
must be that.
Definitely.
Again, as with every makeup,
ears and neck are important.
Yeah, we always forget
our ears.
You always forget?
They are part of the face, and
it's just one of these things
that often on stage what
you go get is a
reddening that occurs.
If you don't put the makeup on,
they will stand out more.
And also just on the
inside, there.
One thing about doing eyebrows,
is that with the
wicked witch, they are evil.
And so you get that whole
feeling of going up and across
there, to give that evil,
menacing look.
And just going and strengthening
that line.
There we are.
Just in the evilness of it.
Oh, a nasty woman.
Now, by closing your eyes, we'll
then go onto the eyes.
And get an evilness again, by
taking them out and being very
dramatic there.
And it's just taking all the
lines out and above, and
filling that in with dark.
It's like a bat wing.
It is like a bat wing.
I think it's just that whole
idea of being evil .
And the most important thing is
that having added the red
underneath, which again
gives that really
evil note about it.
Now, can you smile for me?
No.
Because then you can take
that line, and follow
that line out to there.
And just tip it down
at the edges,
because it makes it meaner.
All right?
And then start in the
middle of the bottom
lip and work outwardly.
And again, you can take
that line and go down.
And you can add a touch of
carmine to that, as well, so
it gives it a stronger tone.
You can see how that dark mixed
with the black really
makes it more hag-like.
There are loads of areas you
can fill in, in terms of
witches, if you want to-- which
is nose to mouth and
even further down.
But in a way, the simpler you
make it, the better and more
striking it'll be.
And pull in even tighter.
You can make that really
quite a strong line.
OK.
And for the stage, you've
centered it and
narrowed your face.
Again, pulling for the side--
and take it even into there.
With a wig, you should have
quite a wicked witch.
Now finally, you just ad that
line for stage, underneath the
eye, there.
With a wig on, you
are the witch.
Do you feel evil enough?
Very evil.
Derry, our subject today
is illness, and
your victim is Warrick.
It is.
Right.
Looking very well, I must say.
He is, indeed, but
not for long.
What are you planning
to do to him?
Well, basically, to bring about
illness, you need to
make sure that a person's pallor
does go really quite
sallow and quite pale.
And so the first thing with
making somebody look unwell,
is to get that pallor.
And is this for all
kinds of illness?
It is, actually, because
in most situations--
most, I will say--
you've got the pallor
having lost color.
There are a few conditions
where it
would do the opposite.
But when you've got to get
specific about illness, it's
very good to go and make sure
you've done your research with
those illnesses on
the first place.
But for general unwell, then
you are dealing with pale.
Right.
So what are you putting
on him now?
I'm putting up a bluey-gray
pancake, with a very soft,
creamy color, as well, just
to bring his tone down.
And as you can see, it's already
making him really
quite pale.
Now, so, we'll just finish off
this bit here, having gone
over your ears and your neck.
And then we move on to the next
stage of putting in some
darkening under your eyes.
So you start-- and you go quite
low down, just to socket
them and blend that away.
Then you come over to the other
eye, and do the same, by
going deeply into the socket
line underneath the eye.
And again, on the side of
the bridge of the nose.
I do quite a lot of darkening in
that area, just to make the
eyes recess and to feel tired.
There we go.
Now at that particular stage,
you add in more of a common
color for the slight swollenness
of eyes.
Looking right up for me.
And you take that right into the
lashes, which also defines
the eyes, and you take that down
and add that color in.
Again, mixing colors is
a good idea, here.
And definitely gives that
sign of not being well.
Now we're coming to
the other side.
What we've been doing--
is if you look--
is bringing your face, in a very
slim way, down this side.
And the other side of your face,
at the moment, is very
much wider.
So if you turn you
head, there.
So the whole idea is
to slim down the
face, in terms of illness.
To make it look drawn,
to make it look
tired, so it registers.
Well-being is far wider.
OK.
So then, we will match this
side to that effect.
Warrick, do you want
to lie down?
How do you feel?
How does it make you feel,
looking like you do?
Actually, it makes me
feel quite ill.
It really helps, then?
Yes, it does.
And would you say that was
general for makeup, when
you've made up in the past
for productions?
Is that all part of your
character going on?
Yes.
It makes up about 30% of
the character, I feel.
Really?
So it's quite important
that you get it right.
Yes.
Now, for horror makeup, is there
any makeup basic that
you would do for
all characters?
So for the horror, you have a
pale base, angled face, and
those tend to work in
most instances.
So you're using sharp
features.
Just as I have done here, in
demonstrating for Dracula, in
doing the widow's peak
and joining it in.
Now, I've already gelled his
hair, darkened the top of it
with some pancake, because of
it being available, and then
use the same thing for doing
the widow's peak.
Now I'm going to move
on and do the sides.
So that you, again,
do sharp lines.
Give him a sense of meanness.
And a sense of meanness.
Absolutely right.
So that it's exaggerated
and brought out.
And then blend it back
in to the hair.
But it's very simple, and
it's very effective.
So you really don't have to
spend a lot of money.
The pancake has been
able to darken the
hair at the same time.
But you can use black sprays.
That also is quite easy to do.
OK, and I'm demonstrating the
eyebrow, and this one you
really can be quite dramatic by
making an absolute peak up
here, as well, and filling in.
And taking them out to the
outside, and exaggerating it.
Now again, for Dracula, doing
some carmine inside the eye
makes it extremely evil.
And that can just be painted
very gently.
And because it's grease, it
won't do any harm, but it
certainly makes the
eyes bloodshot.
So it's a deep red grease
you've got there.
It's a deep red grease.
There we are.
Ooh, yes.
And it's mean.
OK.
Now we then move on to
using gray around the
eye, socketing it.
Just use it inside and blend,
leaving quite a lot of the
white to give you that depth.
Because again, this
is a pale makeup.
Derry, would you encourage
people to--
Close your eyes.
--invest in decent brushes
for this kind of work?
You don't have to spend a
great deal of money, but
definitely do invest
in brushes.
Because they can help speed
up things in terms of your
ability to apply it.
And this just creates
a moody look.
You can add even darker, so that
it really registers, but
you can get the whole mood
and sense of it.
You can also carry that down
the side of the nose, just
gently and shadowing.
That will elongate his
nose, won't it?
Yes.
Again, it just defines the
features of the face when
you're on stage, to be able
to see it from a distance.
You can use that quite strongly,
there, and then
blend it down the side.
There we are.
Now we're going to go on to the
lips, and these I'm going
to define in a dark gray, and
make it really quite sharp
again, to pick up all the points
that I have with the
rest of the makeup.
And actually, I think I'm going
to add a touch of black
into to that, as well, just
to strengthen that up.
And again, the points
do make it mean.
And start again from the middle,
and carry it around
the side, there, and
then fill in.
That has a stunning effect,
doesn't it?
It is a very sharp look,
and powerful, in terms
of being able to--
the mouth is actually,
at the moment,
looking still quite happy.
You could probably, with just a
few strokes, take it out, so
that it became slightly more
sinister on its edges.
And perhaps just straighten that
line to there to make it
slightly meaner.
Jonathan, do you recognize
yourself?
No.
[INTERPOSING VOICE]
The last thing would be the
teeth and if you fancied a
trickle of blood.
And there you have a Dracula.
Ahh.
Brilliant.
Well, no prizes for
guessing your
subject matter this morning.
We're doing clowns, aren't we?
And I see you've started much
the same way you began with
the geisha girl and
the restoration--
with a white face.
And was that the same
technique--
the water-based white makeup
put on with a sponge?
Is that right?
Yes, I've put it on
with a sponge.
And you can have a great deal
of fun, I should think, with
colors and designs.
Well, this one is.
This is definitely where
you can really play.
Lovely.
Add just add in whatever
colors you like.
I like the way you've
done the eyes.
Is it like two windows
there, with shutters?
Yes.
And I just thought, because it's
a bright red wig that's
going on, that we needed to add
in as many bright colors
as we could.
Lovely.
Is this going to be a happy
clown or a sad clown?
This is, indeed, going
to be a happy clown.
Now just filling in
with the yellow.
Did you soap out the eyebrows
first one this one?
No, I didn't.
We were doing this one
quite quickly.
What you should do is soap out
the eyebrows entirely.
And this is the difference,
because otherwise they will
read through.
But if you use the soap, they
disappear entirely.
But Sarah's don't seem to be
particularly dark, so it's
working well.
Yeah.
But the thicker the eyebrows,
the more important it is to
soap them, definitely.
Now, let's see.
Just take that across,
and fill that in.
Now you just put--
a line --you've made the mark of
where the nose will go, you
put the touch of the glue.
Is that spirit gum again?
That's spirit gum.
You can actually use eyelash
glue, Copydex--
Copydex?
Yes.
Yes, you can actually.
The all-purpose glue.
But in this case, we're just
going to use the spirit gum.
And then again, just allow that
to dry that little bit so
it's slightly tacky.
And in this case, I'm waving
it rather than interfering
with the white makeup.
And then just presenting it
carefully, so that it goes on
in that space.
And then with a--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
-- just while we're allowing
that to dry.
And you can then go over it
with some red around it.
And here I'll use a pencil
to get the shape.
We could be happy.
So I'm going to go
really quite out.
That's quite high
up, isn't it?
Yes, definitely going up the
sides here to get that happy--
Is that just a lip pencil?
Yes.
Just to give yourself the shape,
and then you fill in.
Here we go.
Then we'll fill that in.
Sarah, what's it like breathing
through that nose?
It's quite difficult
and rather odd.
You've got a little bit there.
OK.
Now we just finish completing
the mouth.
You can get more complex and
add in loads more color.
You can take a turquoise line
around the mouth, but I think
this still would suffice
and work on stage.
Just keeping it simple.
There we go.
And now, that's complete.
Wonderful.
The last thing to go on
is, indeed, the wig.
Now in this case, it's probably
worth putting on a
stocking top, because you
lose all of your hair
underneath that, OK?
But just because of speed and
everything else, we're putting
it on quickly.
But if you hold your
head back.
Hold the wig at the
front for me.
And then we can pull it
on over your ears.
Let's see.
Relax.
And then we have a clown.
Brilliant.
Do you feel good?
Yes, I do.